Publish a blog regarding to the pluggable storage in vector db. (#3479)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2024-12-04-enable-pluggable-storage-in-opensearch-vectordb.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Deep dive: Enabling pluggable storage in the OpenSearch vector engine"
authors:
 - kdooyong
 - navneev
 - vamshin
 - kolchfa

> date: 2024-12-16

Reviewer: Update date to 2024-12-18 and we'll get this out tomorrow morning.

Author: Updated the date to 2024-12-18 in the article!

categories:
 - technical-posts
 - community
meta_keywords: OpenSearch strategic enhancements, OpenSearch core engine, vector search engine

> meta_description: Showcase how a pluggable storage was enabled in OpenSearch vector db with a practical example of searchable snapshot which was not working in the past.

Reviewer: Please update the meta with the following: 

_meta_keywords:_ OpenSearch vector engine, vector search, pluggable storage, Faiss, NMSLIB, k-NN search, searchable snapshots, performance optimization

_meta_description:_ Discover how OpenSearch enhanced its vector engine with a new abstraction layer, improving storage flexibility and enabling searchable snapshots for vector indexes without compromising performance.

Author: Hi @pajuric 
Updated accordingly. Thank you.

has_math: false
has_science_table: true
---

> In 2019, OpenSearch introduced the Vector Engine, which supports three native engines: Non-Metric Space Library (NMSLIB), Facebook AI Similarity Search (Faiss), and Lucene. Unlike Lucene, which is Java based, Faiss and NMSLIB are C++ libraries that OpenSearch accesses through a lightweight JNI layer. However, these native engines handle I/O using file-based APIs, with Faiss relying on `FILE` pointers and NMSLIB using `std::fstream` to manage graph indexes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In 2019, OpenSearch introduced the Vector Engine, which supports three native engines: Non-Metric Space Library (NMSLIB), Facebook AI Similarity Search (Faiss), and Lucene. Unlike Lucene, which is Java based, Faiss and NMSLIB are C++ libraries that OpenSearch accesses through a lightweight Java Native Interface (JNI) layer. However, these native engines handle I/O using file-based APIs, with Faiss relying on `FILE` pointers and NMSLIB using `std::fstream` to manage graph indexes.
```

For more information about building a k-NN similarity search engine with OpenSearch, see our [documentation](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/knn/index/).

## Challenges with file-based APIs

Native vector engines, such ass Faiss and NMSLIB, offer high performance and predictable latencies. However, their reliance on file-based APIs makes it difficult to integrate them with storage that is not based on file systems. 

Lucene uses the Java-based **Directory** abstraction for reading and writing files, native engines tightly couple their operations to file-based I/O. The **Directory** class abstracts file storage, enabling operations like reading, writing, and managing file metadata across diverse storage systems. This abstraction allows the Lucene vector engine to store files independently of the underlying storage in OpenSearch.

> 

Reviewer 3: Directory is a class that provides an abstraction (signified in the first instance). I think those serve two different purposes so I'd prefer to leave as is.

To improve flexibility, we replaced `fread` with a read interface. Faiss provides an **IOReader** interface for reading index data from various storage systems. For NMSLIB, we introduced a similar read interface called **NmslibIOReader**. These interfaces allow the native engines to read data through an abstraction layer, making integration possible with OpenSearch's directory implementations.

Because k-NN search is conducted after the graph is loaded into memory, this change does not impact average search performance. 

The following diagram provides a high-level overview of the loading layer in native engines.

![High-level overview of the loading layer in native engines](/assets/media/blog-images/2024-12-04-enable-pluggable-storage-in-opensearch-vectordb/loading_layer_high_level.png){:style="width: 100%; max-width: 800px;"}

## Performance benchmarks

The following sections present performance benchmark results.

### Benchmarking environment

We ran benchmarking tests in an environment with the following configuration.

| OpenSearch version      | 2.18                  |
| vCPUs                   | 48                    |
| Physical memory         | 128 GB                |

> | Storage type            | Elastic Block Storage |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Storage type            | Amazon Elastic Block Store (Amazon EBS)|
```

> | Storage type            | Elastic Block Storage |

Reviewer 2: By "Elastic Block Storage", do we mean "Amazon Elastic Block Store (Amazon EBS)"?

Reviewer 3: @0ctopus13prime Could you confirm?

Author: Yes, it is. 
https://aws.amazon.com/ebs/

| JVM                     | 63 GB                 |
| Total number of vectors | 1M                    |
| Dimensions              | 128                   |

### Benchmarking results

> During benchmarking, we observed that introducing the loading layer resulted in identical search performance compared to the baseline. Additionally, there were no differences in system metrics or JVM GC metrics when the loading layer was introduced.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During benchmarking, we observed that introducing the loading layer resulted in identical search performance compared to the baseline. Additionally, there were no differences in system metrics or JVM GC metrics when introducing the loading layer.
```

> Based on these findings, we concluded that we successfully replaced the tight coupling of the File API with Lucene's **IndexInput**. This change maintained the same search performance. Additionally, with this change, you can integrate a custom **Directory** in OpenSearch and save a vector index in your preferred storage system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Based on these findings, we concluded that we successfully replaced the tight coupling of the File API with Lucene's **IndexInput**. This change maintained the same search performance. Additionally, with this change you can integrate a custom **Directory** in OpenSearch and save a vector index in your preferred storage system.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Line 71: Is "File" intentionally capitalized?

Reviewer 3: Capitalized because it's an API.

Configure your cluster for searchable snapshots. For detailed steps, see [Configuring a node to use searchable snapshots](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/tuning-your-cluster/availability-and-recovery/snapshots/searchable_snapshot/#configuring-a-node-to-use-searchable-snapshots).

### Step 1: Create a local index

Use the following request to create a local vector index:

```json
PUT /knn-index/
{
  "settings": {
    "index": {
      "knn": true
    }
  },
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "my_vector": {
        "type": "knn_vector",
        "dimension": 2
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Step 2: Ingest data

Ingest some data into the index:

```json
POST _bulk?refresh
{ "index": { "_index": "knn-index", "_id": "1" } }
{ "my_vector": [1.5, 2.5], "price": 12.2 }
{ "index": { "_index": "knn-index", "_id": "2" } }
{ "my_vector": [2.5, 3.5], "price": 7.1 }
{ "index": { "_index": "knn-index", "_id": "3" } }
{ "my_vector": [3.5, 4.5], "price": 12.9 }
{ "index": { "_index": "knn-index", "_id": "4" } }
{ "my_vector": [5.5, 6.5], "price": 1.2 }
{ "index": { "_index": "knn-index", "_id": "5" } }
{ "my_vector": [4.5, 5.5], "price": 3.7 }
```

### Step 3: Query the local index 

> Query the local index to ensure it's configured correctly:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Query the local index to ensure that it's configured correctly:
```

```json
POST knn-index/_search
{
  "query": {
    "knn": {
      "my_vector": {
        "vector": [2, 3],
        "k": 2
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> The response returns vectors closest to the query vector:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The response returns the vectors closest to the query vector:
```

```json
{
  "took": 16,
  "timed_out": false,
  "_shards": {
    "total": 1,
    "successful": 1,
    "skipped": 0,
    "failed": 0
  },
  "hits": {
    "total": {
      "value": 2,
      "relation": "eq"
    },
    "max_score": 0.6666667,
    "hits": [
      {
        "_index": "knn-index",
        "_id": "1",
        "_score": 0.6666667,
        "_source": {
          "my_vector": [
            1.5,
            2.5
          ],
          "price": 12.2
        }
      },
      {
        "_index": "knn-index",
        "_id": "2",
        "_score": 0.6666667,
        "_source": {
          "my_vector": [
            2.5,
            3.5
          ],
          "price": 7.1
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

### Step 4: Take a snapshot

> Take a snapshot of the index. For detailed steps, see [Take and restore snapshots](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/tuning-your-cluster/availability-and-recovery/snapshots/snapshot-restore/). After taking the snapshot, delete the `knn-index` so it is no longer available locally.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Take a snapshot of the index. For detailed steps, see [Take and restore snapshots](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/tuning-your-cluster/availability-and-recovery/snapshots/snapshot-restore/). After taking the snapshot, delete the `knn-index` so that it is no longer available locally.
```

### Step 5: Create a searchable snapshot index from the snapshot

> Use the following request to restore the original index from the snapshot as a searchable snapshot:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use the following request to restore the original index from the snapshot in order to create a searchable snapshot index
```

> Use the following request to restore the original index from the snapshot as a searchable snapshot:

Reviewer 2: "Use the following request to restore the original index from the snapshot in order to create a searchable snapshot index"?

```json
POST _snapshot/<SNAPSHOT_REPO>/<SNAPSHOT_NAME>/_restore
{
  "storage_type": "remote_snapshot",
  "indices": "knn-index"
}
```

To verify the successful creation of the searchable snapshot index, use the following request:

```json
GET /_cat/indices
```
For more information, see [Create a searchable snapshot index](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/tuning-your-cluster/availability-and-recovery/snapshots/searchable_snapshot/#create-a-searchable-snapshot-index).

### Step 6: Run a vector search query

Run a vector search query on the searchable snapshot index:

```json
POST knn-index/_search
{
  "query": {
    "knn": {
      "my_vector": {
        "vector": [2, 3],
        "k": 2
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> The query returns the same results as the query on the local index in [Step 3](#step-3-query-the-local-index).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The query returns the same results as the local index query in [Step 3](#step-3-query-the-local-index).
```

## Conclusion

> By introducing an abstract I/O layer that uses Lucene's **Directory** abstraction, we eliminated the native engines' dependency on file-based APIs that limited storage to local file systems. This change allows the vector engine to read graph data structures from any storage system supported by OpenSearch's **Directory** implementation. Our extensive benchmark testing confirmed that this change maintained the original file API-based approach's search performance. Notably, we observed no regression in search times after the graphs were loaded into memory (graph loading is a one-time operation for a properly scaled cluster).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By introducing an I/O layer that uses Lucene's **Directory** abstraction, we eliminated the native engines' dependency on file-based APIs that limit storage to local file systems. This change allows the vector engine to read graph data structures from any storage system supported by OpenSearch's **Directory** implementation. Our extensive benchmarking tests confirmed that this change maintains the search performance of the original file-API-based approach. Notably, we observed no regression in search times after the graphs were loaded into memory (graph loading is a one-time operation for a properly scaled cluster).
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Line 247, first sentence: I assumed that we didn't need both "abstract" and "abstraction" in the same sentence.

> With this new read interface, you can now use any **Directory** implementation in OpenSearch with vector indexes. This added flexibility makes it possible to store vector data in remote storage solutions like S3.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this new read interface, you can now use vector indexes with any OpenSearch **Directory** implementation. This added flexibility makes it possible to store vector data in remote storage solutions like Amazon Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3).
```

## Next steps

> In version 2.18, we introduced the ability to enable vector search queries using Lucene's **Directory** and **IndexInput** classes. Looking ahead, version 2.19 will expand this functionality to the native index creation process. Specifically, the k-NN plugin will begin using the **IndexOutput** class to write graph files directly to segments. For more information, see [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/2033).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In version 2.18, we introduced the ability to use vector search queries with Lucene's **Directory** and **IndexInput** classes. Looking ahead, version 2.19 will expand this functionality to the native index creation process. Specifically, the k-NN plugin will begin using the **IndexOutput** class to write graph files directly to segments. For more information, see [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/2033).
```

> In the 2.18 release, we introduced the capability to enable vector search queries using Lucene's **Directory** and **IndexInput** classes. Looking ahead, the 2.19 release will expand this functionality to the native index creation process. Specifically, the k-NN plugin will start using the **IndexOutput** class to write graph files directly to segments. For more information, see [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/2033).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In version 2.18, we introduced the ability to enable vector search queries using Lucene's **Directory** and **IndexInput** classes. Looking ahead, version 2.19 will expand this functionality to the native index creation process. Specifically, the k-NN plugin will begin using the **IndexOutput** class to write graph files directly to segments. For more information, see [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/2033).
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Line 253, first sentence: "the ability to use vector search queries with Lucene's..."?

> Additionally, because the k-NN plugin now has the ability to stream vector data structure files, this presents an opportunity for partial loading of these files. This enhancement will reduce memory pressure on the cluster and deliver better price-performance, especially under high-stress conditions. For more information, see [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/1693).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, the k-NN plugin now having the ability to stream vector data structure files presents an opportunity for partial loading of these files. This enhancement will reduce memory pressure on the cluster and deliver better price-performance, especially under high-stress conditions. For more information, see [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/1693).
```
